---
layout: post
title: DataStructure - Set
date: 2017-04-19 13:00:00 -0700
categories: Study-Notes
tag: dataStructure
---
* content
{:toc}



Last update: 20170419

## Set

__Standard Operations:__
1. test membership - always
2. add/remove - usually
3. union/intersect - sometimes

__Union/Intersect Operations can be easily implemented through 1 and 2.__  

``` python
def Union(S1, S2):
  C = deepcopy(S1)
  for element in S2:
    C.add(element)
  return C

def Intersect(S1, S2):
  C = emptySet
  for element in S1: # if S1 is shorter
    if element in S2:
      C.add(element)
  return C
```

__The chart shows how efficient test/add/remove ops will be under different Implementations.__

* n denotes the number of current keys in the SET.  
* U denotes the number of all possible keys that could go into the SET.

| Implementation     | Time      | Space         
|--------------------|-----------|---------------
| HashTable          | O(1)      | O(n) keys / O(nlogU) bits ?
| BitVector          | O(1) fast | O(U) bits
| BloomFilter        | O(1)      | O(n)

### BitVector Implementation

If you want to represent a SET of integers {0, 1, 2 ... 31}, you can use a single 32-bit integer S to do it, with each bit 1 or 0 denoting corresponding element's membership. Such that:  

``` python
def isMember(x, S):
  return (S & (1 << x) != 0)

def add(x, S):
  S = S | (1 << x)

def remove(x, S):
  S = S & ~(1 << x)  
```

__Note__ two obvious constraints:  
1. the number of elements representable is limited by [word size](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Word_(computer_architecture)).
2. the type of elements can only be integer.

### Bloom Filter

[Bloom Filter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bloom_filter) is a time/space efficient data structure when small chances of false positive is not a big issue.  

__Here is how it is designed:__

Create an bitArray of size (C * n) where C is a small constant and n is the number of keys you want to store.

Create k independent hash functions mapping each key to k bits.

What does the following mean?  
hash one time. key -> (klog(Cn)) bits - then split values to {h1, h2, ..., hk}  

``` python
# B = BloomFilter()
def isMember(x, B):
  for i in range(k):
    h = H[i] # think H as a mapping between i and the hash function.
    if B[h(x)] is False: return False
  return True

def add(x, B):
  for i in range(k):
    h = H[i] # think H as a mapping between i and the hash function.
    B[h(x)] = 1
```

__Note:__ When checking membership of some element x in a bloomFilter, there is a chance (less than $$ ({\frac{k}{C}})^{k} $$) that false positive occurs. That is returning True with a key that's not in BF.


Last update: 20170419

### Cuckoo Filter

Similarity with Bloom Filter:  
1. constant rate of false positive.
2. linear number of bits space consumed.  

Difference from Bloom Filter:
1. increasing number of entries will not affect false positive rate  
2. allow deletion (because it uses a lookup table implementation)
3. better reference locality. WHY? BF only needs one array.

__Implementation:__
1. create two tables as they are in Cuckoo hashing.
2. hash the key to find its location in 1st table and put in a $$ \log_{2}^{\frac{1}{\epsilon}} $$ bits checksum (epsilon is the false positive rate). (there is a chance when different keys have the same checksum)
3. when kicking a checksum from 1st table to 2nd table, use the following to compute its location in 2nd table: original_location XOR hash(checksum). (Use XOR so that when the 2nd cell is found to be filled, using the above formula can throw it back to the same cell in 1st table.)


### Inverted Bloom Filter

The use case of IBF is typically finding the small differences between two large sets. And this data structure is specifically tailored for that purpose.  

Similarity with Bloom Filter:
1. false positive rate? why would it work if false positive still possible.
2. linear bits space consumed ? not implemented by bits.

Difference from Bloom Filter:  
1. allow deletion.
2. designed to list remaining element.
3. For a fixed space, arbitrary number of entries are allowed, because the whole point of this data structure is not membership testing or whatsoever typically in a SET data structure.  

__Use case - "Set Reconciliation" - Distributed Version Control__

1. add every line in textA as an element into IBF
2. for every line in textB, remove it from IBF.
3. list the remaining element in IBF - the different content that A has but B doesn't.
4. repeat the above process to find out the different content that B has but A doesn't.

__Implementation:__

Each cell in IBF contains (x, y, z) where: WHY do we need these three info?  
1. x : the number of elements in this cell.
2. y : the sum of elements in this cell.
3. z : the sum of checksum of each element in this cell.

* "Pure cell" : the cell that has only one element within it.
